##### Welcome to my research meta analysis! The objective is this assignment is to critically analyze a study of your choice. Since many researchers may be unconciously manipulating the results of their data, it is our job to analyze the merits of any given study and not to take the study at face value.

The study that I analyzed is called “Chronic Lack of Sleep is Associated With Increased Sports Injuries in Adolescent Athletes,” published in the Journal of Pediatric Orthopaedics. The authors of this study are Dr. Matthew D. Wilenski (Elite Sports Medicine, Connecticut Children’s Medical Center, Farmington, CT),  Dr. David L. Skaggs (Children’s Orthopaedic Center, Children’s Hospital Los Angeles, Los Angeles), Gregory A. Bishop (Harvard-Westlake School, The Institute for Scholastic Sport Science and Medicine, Studio City, CA), Dr. J Lee Pace (Children’s Orthopaedic Center, Children’s Hospital Los Angeles, Los Angeles), Dr. David A. Ibrahim (Children’s Orthopaedic Center, Children’s Hospital Los Angeles, Los Angeles), Dr. Tishya A.L. Wren (Children’s Orthopaedic Center, Children’s Hospital Los Angeles, Los Angeles), and Audrius Barzdukas (Harvard-Westlake School, The Institute for Scholastic Sport Science and Medicine, Studio City, CA). Overall, the study was funded by the Pediatric Orthopaedic Society of North America (POSNA). In this study, the authors have correlated various training practices, nominal data, and sleep schedules with the risk of injury in student athletes. In total, the ten independent variables are as follows: gender, age, grade in school at time of study participation, hours of sleep obtained per night, weeks of participation in sports per year, hours of participation per week (including time spent training, practicing, and competing), number of sports, strength training, private coaching, and subjective assessment of “having fun in sports.” For every given indpendendent varaible in the study, the null hypothesis  is that there is no relationship between that variable and injury rates in young athletes. On the other hand, the alternative hypothesis is that there is a relationship between that tested variable and injury rates in young athletes. 
  
The sample of students that the researchers used were students in an urban private middle/high school. 160 male and female students in grades 7 to 12 participated in the study.  There were two main components of data that the researchers collected: a student survey and an injury log. The researchers asked the students to fill out a survey that asked 10 questions regarding their sports activities and sleep schedules. Two questions, for example, asked how many weeks a year the student participated in organized sports and how many hours per night of sleep the student got during the sports season. The researchers were interested in this student survey because each question served as an independent variable to identify the various injury risk factors. Significant independent variables in the univariate analysis were then used in the multivariate analysis. The injury log that the researchers used in the study consisted of any injury that necessitated a visit to the athletic trainer’s room for evaluation or treatment. In this 21 month period, the injuries were classified by the location of the injury, activity while injured, and the sport the athlete was participating in. After all of the data was collected, the survey data was compared with the injury logs using a program called Stata, which performed statistical analyses. Although the tabulated data of the various injuries sustained and the survey was included in the study, the original dataset regarding each student’s survey and injury data was omitted. 

Although the researchers have collected a wide array of useful information about the students, there was some data left out in the study. The researchers have failed to account for napping, specific medications that would affect sleep or injury risk, and samples of students in other geographical, socioeconomic, and educational settings. The researchers themselves have acknowledged these three factors in their conclusion, as these are issues that could change the results of the data. 
 
Using the Stata program, the researchers were able to determine the relative risk of injury of each of the 10 independent variables. According to the data, students who slept less than 8 hours a night had the strongest risk of injury (Relative Risk=2.1, P=0.01). The study states that “Sixty-five percent of athletes (56/86) who reported sleeping <8 hours per night were injured, compared with 31% of athletes (8/26) who reported sleeping ≥8 hours per night.” Furthermore, the study finds that “Increased age (RR=1.4 per year; 95% CI, 1.2-1.5; P<0.001) and grade in school (RR=1.4 per grade; 95% CI, 1.2-1.6; P<0.001) were significantly associated with increased likelihood of injury.” Thus, in the multivariate analysis of the data, the number of hours of sleep per night and the grade in school were the most significant injury risk factors.     
    
I believe that publish or perish did not have an effect on this study. First, many members of the team of researchers in the study have already published a number of studies, preventing the group from being pressured to publish this study. Furthermore, many of the researchers are experienced medical doctors, so their hypothetical lack of publishing likely has no effect on their desire to publish. Lastly, the results of the study are not particularly surprising, given that there have already been numerous studies that concluded that a lack of sleep lowers cognitive functions in adolescents. Thus, I believe that there has been no such institutional pressure to publish a finding that is not particularly fascinating in order for the researchers’ academic careers to succeed. 

###### Link to the study:
[Chronic Lack of Sleep is Associated With Increased Sports Injuries in Adolescent Athletes](https://journals.lww.com/pedorthopaedics/fulltext/2014/03000/chronic_lack_of_sleep_is_associated_with_increased.1.aspx)

Thank you for reading my analysis! Check out my previous blog posts, and stay updated for more cool things on my website!
>Mikail Akbar
>
>Expert Scientific Study Critic
